---
layout: default
title: The Three Economies
---
Economics isn’t about money, but about what people need and want, and the decisions, and sacrifices,
they make to get these things.

When we talk about “the Economy”, we are usually referring to the money economy, in which the things
people need and want are paid for, and often to the market economy, in which the beneficiary pays
directly. However, many needs and wants are provided-for without money changing hands at all.

I think this distinction lies at the heart of fruitful thinking and discussion of economics and politics:
•	the market economy,
•	the tax economy, and
•	the moneyless economy.

Economists usually limit their investigations of people’s wants and needs to defined goods and services,
which usually have to be paid for. But many of the most important things to us hardly fall into these
categories: relationships, family, the outdoors, volunteering, activism, politics, culture, self-expression,
and so on.

Economists might argue that there is little they can usefully say about most of these things, and so turn
their attention to the other two (money) economies. Some might try to cast these things as services, and to
try to treat them in ways analogous to the tangible transactions of the money economies.

I think they matter for two reasons: first, that any political use of economic ideas must look at the
complete picture, no matter how intractable some parts of it may be – if a political change will impact
the moneyless economy, that impact must be discussed, even if it cannot be quantified in the way that an
impact on the money economy might be.

Secondly, that many activities are transferable between the three economies, hence there is direct
interdependence between (some parts of) the moneyless economy, and the tax and market economies. In fact,
I believe the arrangement of activities between these three economies is the primary characteristic of a
society, and the transfer of activity between them is the main topic of political debate in the western
world today – even above the level of re-distribution of wealth.

A summary comparison of some of the characteristics of the three economies:

|						|Market							|Tax							|Moneyless	|
|What?					|quantified goods and services	|somewhat quantified services	|wants and needs sometimes characterised as services	|
|Usual Examples?		|retail, finance, leisure and entertainment, transport, housing	|justice, policing, education, healthcare, defence, social services	|volunteering, community action, neighbourliness, living/being in the wild, open-source, home-schooling	|
|Payment?				|direct by the beneficiary		|indirect, by government of other responsible authority		|none	|
|Value?					|market price					|perceived, or measured outcomes|personal judgment	|
|Provider?				|companies, traders				|government agencies, contracted companies	|individuals, the natural world	|
|Selection?				|market choice					|government decision			|personal choice	|
|Provider Motivation?	|profit							|re-distribution, social / national benefit, occasionally profit	|senses of duty, social responsibility, self-expression, etc	|
|Employee Motivation?	|money, ambition				|social responsibility, vocation|"	|
|Appearance in GDP?		|valued at market prices		|valued at cost					|not included	|


It might be thought that the market economy is simply the private sector, the tax economy is the public
sector, the moneyless economy is the rest of society, and that is all to be said on the subject. But I
think this is wrong, for the following reasons:

1. Increasingly, private sector companies operate within the tax economy, contracted to provide services
for governments, whilst government agencies sometimes offer services in the market economy.

2. As well as at the national level, this distinction can be made at the local level, and within
organisations. For example, workers within organisations will often help each other informally, across
departmental and divisional boundaries, forming a kind of moneyless economy.

Staff functions and shared services within organisations operate as cost centres, providing services to
revenue-generating units, and being an allocated charge to those units, commissioned by board management –
essentially a tax economy within the organisation. Outsourcing can then be seen as a transfer of the
activity from a tax to a market economy.

3. At the national level, the three economies have not been static over time. The history of civilisation
is the gradual transfer of activity from the moneyless economy to the market economy and then, within the
last two centuries, to the tax economy. For example, the earliest schools in Britain were usually run by
religious foundations (moneyless), followed by the Public Schools (money) and other private schools, as well
as grammar and other local community schools, most of which was subsumed, last century, into the state system (tax).

Tea Party – transfer from tax to market
US Democrats – protection of tax
Lansley – introduction of market into NHS
Cameron Big Society – a transfer from tax to moneyless


