---
layout: default
title: Economic Short-Termism
---
My biggest concern for the British economy is a fetish for short term gains at the expense of the log-term creation of value.

“Short term”, “long term”, and “value” are clearly all vague concepts that will need to be defined and explained more clearly
 as we go along.

Part of the problem is Jack Welch’s principle of “maximising shareholder value”. The “shareholder value” could be conceived
 as the long-term interests of the shareholder, but in reality, it is always measured by short-term movements of share price,
  hence only actually benefitting shareholders who buy and sell at the right times.

Another part of the problem is a narrow view of the “entrepreneur” as someone who starts a company. The idea seems to be that
 after a couple of years, the company (if still trading) is established, the hard part is over, and entrepreneur really ought
  to sell her stake, and look for a fresh opportunity, to ensure her unique business-starting talents are put to best use,
   and ensure boredom doesn’t set in. Similarly, venture capitals need their “exit strategy” to ensure their opportunity-spotting
    skills, and the money that going with them, find their optimal home.

A third problem is the absence of a passion for producing the best products or providing the best service in the market, or at
 least, the absence, from the top of the company down, of the desire to build a business that can continue to deliver top
  products and services into the far future. [weak?]

A final, unifying, mistake is the belief that companies exist to deliver profits to their owners. In a state that signs up to
 some level of social responsibility, they do not. They exist to provide people with good, safe, products and services, with
  good jobs that maximise the productive use of their talents, and with opportunities to invest and grow their capital at
   various levels of risk. Of course, entrepreneurs start companies to make profits and investors buy shares to share in them.
    Individuals will obey laws to avoid arrest and prosecution, but the laws exist for the overall benefit of society.
     Similarly, individuals create and invest in companies to make money, but society allows companies to exist, and fosters
      them, because they deliver social benefits.

The consequence is that what is good for a company is not always good for society, and vice versa. Furthermore, some types of
 company, and perhaps even some industries, may provide more social benefit than others.

Radical free-marketeers may disagree, believing that:
•	less-than-optimally-desired products are not bought, less-than-optimally-profitable companies go bust,
 less-than-optimally-used workers change jobs, and less-than-optimally-invested capital moves elsewhere;
•	the price paid for a good or service reflects the only meaningful value it has;
•	the net social good (if this phrase has any meaning) of any situation or decision is only and simply the sum of individual
 goods of its component parts;
•	hence there cannot be a difference between what is best for an individual company and what is best for society.

It seems to me that most people will easily be able to think of numerous counter-examples to these premises, even if an
 analytical response is deeper, and involve the idea of humans as non-rational, or not-always-rational, actors.

I was wrong – there is another mistake – that a worker’s productivity is constant, or at least, varies only slightly, in a
 limited and predictable way. My chief argument for a greater focus on the long term relies on a better understanding of
  worker productivity. 

To be written up better…

- in Smith’s “pin factory” example, worker productivity is multiplied by 1000s, so clear it can vary a lot!
- in that example, the tasks are very simple – in fact they get simpler, and it is easy for us to see what is going on
- the economy (in the West anyway) has changed, and people’s jobs are more complicated – the Knowledge economy
- obviously true for lawyers and investment bankers, but equally true in manufacturing – the repetitive jobs are easy to automate and have been
- companies gain huge productivity boosts from well-organised quality-management systems that enable all workers to contribute to continual improvement
- good training and worker motivation (worker productivity) have a massive impact of overall company productivity and hence profitability
- companies with a passion to deliver the best products and services invest more in research and development, motivate their workers better, and hence become more profitable
- change, even innovation, can be very detrimental, disrupting processes, requiring workers to learn to use new skills, tool and techniques
- hence innovation has a cost, that needs to be repaid through a sustained period of increased productivity
- frequent disruptive innovation can prevent that repayment from ever being fully made
- anyway, we need to change our image of “innovation” – it is mostly the small, unnoticed, “inside the industry” improvements in products and production techniques that improve quality, reliability, convenience and reduce cost, it is not usually the “Dragon’s Den” ideas for entirely new products that often come from outside the industry


