---
layout: default
title: Local Labour Content
---
A few years ago, at the height of the recent financial crisis, the question of Keynesian Economics became
important for a while. People who wanted to maintain public spending at existing levels, in the face of increased
public debt, looked to Keynes for support.

Oddly to me, the debate never really examined the way that fiscal stimulus is supposed to actually work. Those
opposed to it, seemed to simply ignore the question. Britain's economy at the beginning of the 21st century is 
very different from what it was at the beginning of the 20th.

At the heart of the fiscal stimulus, is the concept of the "multiplier" and what Keynes called the "psychological
factors" that drive individual's decision to spend money or save it.

The "multiplier" is the "knock-on effect" that one spending decision might have on creating another. By selling an
extra car in the month, the salesman will feel more confident about his/her financial circumstances, and more likely
to go out and spend "discretionary" money - a restaurant meal, new clothes.

The image is that of the nuclear reactor - a neutron collides with a nucleas, splitting it, and releasing several
more neutrons, each of which can cause a further split - the "chain reaction" that can grow exponentially. In
reality, many factors can dampen the reaction - neutron can escaping without hitting a nucleus, or be travelling
too slow, or too fast, to cause nuclear fission. By controlling these factors, the nuclear reactor generates heat
without exploding.

In the ecomonic version, it is hard to imagine that many transactions would be big enough on their own to trigger
a further transaction - the car salesman example is deliberately a "big ticket item", I doubt that my buying a Mars
bar at the local newsagent will have the owner on the phone booking his next holiday.

But a key difference is that spend is cumulative while the neutron collision is not. If the newsagent's custom
increases by 10% due to lots of small extra transactions, the owner will start to think about that holiday. Coupled
with that is a margin effect, common in economics. Everyone has a subsistence level of income that is spend on
what they would consider essentials, everything on top of that can be saved, or spent in a variety of ways. If
income is only 5% above the subsistence level, the person might feel concerned about the future, and save it all,
but if it rises to 15%, they might feel more confident and spend it all.

So far, so Keynesian. But this is still based on several assumptions about the structure of the economy that might
not hold, which all come down to one fundamental: that money is spent "within the system".

Firstly, this means that money is spent locally. If we're talking about a policy for the British economy, is it
that helpful that I spend my discretionary money on a new TV that was made in China? Possibly more than one might
suppose, as perhaps up to 50% of the sale price might remain in Britain, but nevertheless, neutrons escape the
reactor, and in this globalised world, many more do now than 100 years ago.

Secondly, the money needs to reach ordinary workers' pay packets in proportion. We are no longer a nation of shop-
keepers, and most people earn a fairly fixed salary. Suppose we bought our TV from a high-street chain. The  sale
price goes to a large company, which spends fractions of it on the various unit costs involved - the 50% to the
foreign manufacturer, smaller elements on shipping and transport, in-store sales, and corporate costs. The rest is
profit.
  
   

 