---
layout: default
title: The Social Enterprise
---
The recent problems of the Co-operative Group in the UK appear to pit the principles of the Social Enterprise
against the demands of Western capitalism. The Co-operative's Board appear understandably reluctant to approve
the changes that would see their organisation become like any other for-profit - perhaps thinking of it as a
betrayal of all the effort and enthusiasm put in over the years by supporters of the Co-operative Movement.

The response of free-market capitalism might be: "If you want to be special, why are you a public quoted company?
Whatever you may feel, your obligation is already to your shareholders. By clinging on to communitarian principles
and structures you are simply discharging that obligation badly."

How did the Co-operative Group end up in such a contradictory position?

What do I mean by a Social Enterprise? A company whose purpose is not only / primarily / at all to maximise profit.
Instead it is (also) to further the interests of deserving groups - usually its workers and / or customers.
It typically does that by selling its products or services below the market price, or for free, and / or by paying
some of its staff above the market price. It does this by receiving money, time and efforts from donors - which
may include customers (paying above market price) and volunteers (earning below market wage, or nothing).

The crux of the problem for the Social Enterprise is success - what it means and how to deal with it. If a charity
fully succeeds in its aims then its work is done, its purpose ceases to exist - yet few charities voluntarily liquidate
themselves. A charity usually winds itself up because its donors stop giving - because they no longer believe the cause has
merit, because they think other organisations serve the cause better, or because they run out of resources to give.

Of course, a charity may legitimately continue to exist, and possibly grow, because the need it serves is increasing
faster than its ability to address that need, even though the charity is doing so effectively.
 
Whatever the stated aims of an organisation, the latent measure of its success is in its continued existence and
growth, and its disappearance suggests failure.

So the Social Enterprise needs to continue to exist, and even grow, to be successful. And conversely, it needs to be
successful (i.e. efficient) to continue to exist - in the sense that its donors need to feel it gives enough "bang for
its buck".

So, for example, a co-operative grocery might sell its produce cheaper than commercial outfits in order to provide a
social good to its poor customers, but selling too cheap leads to perverse outcomes, perhaps unscrupulous customers
selling on at a profit. It may benefit from voluntary labour, but it will still need to operate reasonably efficiently
in order to devote its money donations effectively to its primary mission of providing groceries cheaply.

The labour may be voluntary, but typically the line between donor and beneficiary is blurred, and the intention of
co-operatives (though by no means all other charities) is to foster a community in which beneficiaries donate their
time and labour, and hence receive the additional benefits of acquiring skills and work experience.

But at some point, the discipline of market pricing must be applied to the organisation's inputs as well as the outputs.
Even free labour must not prevent the organisation from being at least adequately efficient, and will probably,
through the acquisition of skills and experience, become valuable enough to equate with whatever is available in the
open labour market. So it reaches the point where it is better for the individual be to paid a full and fair wage than
to remain in the donor/beneficiary position, and it's also better for the co-operative to be able to draw on the depth
and the flexibility of the whole labour force.

And before you know it, its identity as a social enterprise is lost, and it has become, in effect if not in name,
a "normal" company.

Now the co-operative supporter might think this is just a variant of capitalist's "inevitability" argument, that the
capitalist sneakily re-casts their own position as not a proposal of policy but a description of reality - along the
lines of: "this is what human behaviour is, things will always go this way eventually, so why fight it?".

But a constant pressure does not equal inevitability. The above model suggests that there will always be a pressure
acting on a social enterprise to become a normal enterprise simply by being successful. After all, the goal of most
charities is surely to help their beneficiaries to no longer need their services - if is this possible.

The challenge of the social enterprise is how to, in the nicest possible way, push its beneficiaries through it, and
out the other side, without trampling on the loyalty it will surely generate among them. If necessary, to hive off
whole pieces that have become "normal", even if the profit they generate funds the more charitable parts of the
enterprise. The capital generated is realized as cash, and the identity of the organization as a social one is
strengthened.

