---
layout: default
title: The Nature of Democracy
---


Democracy is simplistically conceived as voting for representatives, and the measure of the quality of a democracy is too closely related to mathematical proportions - hence "Proportional Representation is better than First-Past-The-Post" because each vote carries the same weight, and parties are represented in strict proportion to the votes cast for them.

But there are several other factors that are more important:

"Who Votes" - A Polity

The electorate needs to be at some level an identifiable group with some set of common goals, interests, cultural references, expectations of the state, and ways of engaging with each other. National borders and language barriers clearly make it difficult to forge a common polity. Greece clearly has had wildly different expectations of what the EU is about from Germany. The US is an example of a heterogenous polity, bound by abstract ideas of its national identity, and we can see these ideas being stretched in their current polarized politics.

"Who You Vote For" - Proper Parties

In a democratic assembly, elected members vote on laws, government actions, budgets, and so on. But each member in isolation has no control over the outcome of the vote. Hence in every real assembly, factions or parties form, even if not explicitly recognized in the constitution. Furthermore, these parties are important for the ordinary voter and they provide a guide to the intentions of the member s/he is considering voting for. The party represents stated political choices, usually in the form of a manifesto, as well as an underlying political vision, and these provide natural discipline for members, to which a system of whips can add further discipline.

Party calculus, e.g. tactical voting in an election or whipped votes in a legislature, is sometimes seen as a deficiency of democracy, but it is actually an essential element, whose importance is little appreciated because we seldom see politics without parties.

The EU has party groupings, but few EU voters even know their names, let alone what they stand for. And they don't stand for coherent political platforms because their is no party discipline at the EU level. And that is because their political bases are all national - even if these EU grouping had political machines they would have any influence on who stood for national or EU political positions, because these are controlled by national or regional parties answerable to their electorates.

In a democracy, political parties represent stable and coherent political programme alternatives, and are the candidate governments promising to enact them if chosen.

"What You Vote For" - Everything on the Table

Above all, those being elected should have the power to effect whatever change the electorate want to see. There are of course different levels of democracy, each with their own scope of action: local, regional, national and supranational levels, and people have no difficulty understanding what each is for, and what powers it exercises.

This aspect is a problem in the EU in two ways. Firstly, the Blame Game. National politicians in the EU have frequently blamed it for unpopular actions and measures, whilst taking credit for its successes. It has no true locus of elected power above the national level to own these issues, and to balance and arbitrate between the effectiveness and unpopularity of different aspects of each policy. Politicians naturally try to deflect unpopularity, and "bureaucrats" are a common target for such deflection, but the absence of a strong central political position at the top of the EU makes this a particular problem for it.

The second, and recent, manifestation of this problem is the "treaty change" excuse, for example in response to David Cameron's attempts to renegotiate some of the elements of EU membership he felt were unpopular in the UK. But the position that a desired change is effectively impossible owing to the need to secure 28 changes of treaty is a democratic problem, and it would become a pressing problem if the change was desired by a majority of the populace.

In a democracy, everything needs to be on the table.